4335c9A / ZO25/ 161

Gommidln&
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

l{alional Programme
on Climale Change
and Human Heallh

Health Advisorv on,{ir Pollution

1

File No, F,No.7OINCOC/CEOH&CCH/2018-19/APjdvisory (ComPuter No. !t/6972)
pm
cenerated from eoilce by BR, itoEaN MALTK O/O SEC1 -PP5{BMM)-wIOHFW, PPs. DOHFW DEPARTMET{I on !l/lol2o2s 06,4!

J

451508E/2025/169

National Programme on Climate Change &Human Health
National centre for Disease Control
Directorate General of Health Services

MoHFW
October 2025

Purpose of the Document
The present health advisory document on air pollution and health is meant for the health
department in the states including the programme oflicials to enable them in developing certain

appropriate mechanisms to address health issues arising due to exposure to air pollution in

their respective areas. This includes a background understanding of the present burden of
diseases atributed to air pollution, major sources of pollution, vulnerable groups, its health

effects and main symptoms and understanding of air quality information in their respective
areas

The document also provides suggestions to the state health deparhent on ways to
obtain the air quality information from pollution control board for making people aware of the

potential health issues and informed them ofprotective and prevsntive health measures. The
addressing mechanisms also mention on ways to focus on strengthening ofhealth care service

provisions in the health facilities, its preparedness and response actions during high air
pollution level. It further mentions of health sector strengthening measures like health action
plan development, considerations of air pollutiorr and few action points for health sector in
Delhi NCR. It also suggested IEC messages for widespread public health communication on

Do's and Dont's to protect, prevent and control health issues ofthe general population and
also, for those having medically underlying diseases. Some of the social media messages arc

also added for reference purposes. There is an addition for messages padcularly for
households and for school children in the country.

The document has provided important links to access relevant documents on air

pollution and health issues like the technical docuurents, IEC materials, aaining modules etc.
developed under NPCCHH and others for references ofthe state offrcials.

1|Pag

e

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under llpCCHH
2

FIL l{o, F.No.7olttCOC/CEOH&CCH/2018-19/Ap_Advlio.y

(Computer No. 3rz597a)
Cch.r.t d from €Otflc€ by 8RI MOHAN itAJ|( O/O SECy -pps(Bt,littilollFw. pps, OOSfW D€p AT Et{r on lr/toleo2s o6:4s pm

ffio*=

45130AE/2025/169

Contributors

The preseut d<x'umcnt orr Health Advisory on Air Pollutiorr, 2025 ulder NPCCHH MoHRV) is qxlated from the previous
public hcaldr advisory on ail pollution.

The advisory rvas developcd nith thc inputs from 'Icchnical lirpert C,r'oup (TtrGhrrernbus ou Air pollution and Human
Health under NPCCHH, inputs liom CPCB ald othcr rclevant stakehoklers worting on air pollution and health. Tlrc
lblloutrg ale dre TEG and othcr cxlrcrrs participarcd in the development ofthe advisory.

1. l)rol. :\rrald Klislrnal, C('Nl,,\llNIS
2. Pr'of. JS 1'lrakur, t'(ilMlill Charrrligulr
3. [)roll .\slrutosh Agrnral, l'ulmrxrlogisL, l'(il]lt)ll Chaldigarh
4. [1t,1. Kalpaua l]alklisluran, Sri llarnacharrdr:r Institrrtc fbr Highel Education & Rcscarch, Chcruui
5. ['ro[. Anart M<,hau, l\rLnorokrgist. .\lINIS
6. l)r,\ay. l'acdiatrics,Salilarjurrgllospital
7. Dr'. llS l)lralirvrrlScicntist () N(lt) I(lMIt
8. l)r, VK Soni, [-lcad, l')rvirnrne rrtal it'lonitoring anrl llcscarch Ccntrc, IlvID, MolS
9. O. -[lirumur r1", Scientist li, l)irisiolal Hcad l'C['l)ivision, CPCB
10. VK SIrukla, Addition;Ll l)ircctor., C['Cl]
t

l. Ahh5n Pathali, Scicutist l), CPCI!

12. l"asiur liclrrn:rn, Scicntist C, CPCI]
13. Sanghiur lloy, ('lxlrtlhrul, CP(.II
14. l)r', ltxrrrrima l'rabllakaran, l)cputy l)ircctor antl Hcad I.)nirorunclt Hcad, PH!'I
15. Proll llarirulra Kluirtal, I)cpt. of ('rrmrnuuitl' Mc<licinc & Schrx>l of Public Hcatth, l'GlMllR Chandigalh
16. l)r llarslurl llarrresh Sllvc, Adtll. l]rol'. C(IN'I,,\IIMS
17. I1-ot Sagnik l)cy, II'l- l)clhi
18. l)r Strn'sh Kurrli Molummcd, rrlblld Banli lndia
19. Mrs. Nladr>n, \l'orkl lla.rrk Ldia
20. Dr Canntl l,urrg Can' I.burrdatiorr

21. l)ir-va l)atta, t Ntll'Irrdia
22. Sumit Sharnra. I INI'IP India
The programme is very grateful to all those who have provided valuable inputs in the document to help address the health
issues of the people impacted due to exposure lo air pollution in the country. The Programme Division has updated the
advisory with latest provisions under NPCCHH, NHM.

2lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under IIPCCHH
3

File t{o. F.trlo.70lNcoc/cEoHllccH/20rr-rg/aP-advlrory

(computer No. !l76912)

G.n.r.t d trorn €Otnce by 8Rt, MoHAtit MALTK o/o sECy -pPs(Bt{it)-trtohfw, PPS, DoHFw DEPARTME T on at/1o/2o2s o6tL 9n

ffi*O==

453504E/2025/159

Contents

Maior sources of air pollution in the country are

-

5

Understanding air quality/AQl levels and its health siBnificance

5

8

Vulnerable Population to health effects ofair pollution:............................

8

Air Quality Early Warning System (AQEWS) for Delhi and lndia (Advanced High Resolution)...

10

Recommendations to the States (main action pointsF.....

11

1l

Getting Air Quality information in Health Secto

Strengthening of Healthcare services to address the air pollution related health issues.........................................11

Health Adaptation Plan on air pollution and health (State/ District level): ..............................................................

14

Health secto/s response in context of CPCB's "Graded Response Action Plan"

15

16

Annexure l: IEC messa8es for Public Awareness on Air Pollution and Health Concerns under NPCCHH

16

Annexure ll: Social Media Messages under NPCCHH

18

Annexure lll: Health Advisory for household air

pollution...................

............. 21

Annexure lV: Health Advisory on air pollution for SchoolChildren
Annexure V: Advisory for construction and demolition

22

workers...................

................................. 23

ANNExURE Vl Chest Clinic

3lPage

26

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
4

Fll. tito. t.t{o.rolNcDc/cEoH&ccH/20t,-t9/lr_Mvlsory (computar to_ !t16972)
G.n.6t d from.ornc by ai, roHAl{ llaul( o/o sEc'v -P?s(aMia).t{oHfw. P?s, ooHFw oEp RTMEI{T on

'rltolzoz5

06:45 prn

ffiO*=

45 350b4 / 20?5 / 169

Glossary of Abbreviations
AIIMS

All India lnstitute of !ledical Sciences Delhi

AP
AQEWS

Air Pollution
Air Oualih Early Warning S\stem

AQI

Air Quality Index

c.{A.QNtS
CHCs

Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoriog Stations
Community Health Centres
Com muni$" Health OIfi cer
Cerebrovascular Strokes
Carbon lvlonoride

CHO
CNS
CO
COPD
CPCB

CVD

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonart Disease
Central Pollution Corltrol Board
Cardio Vascular Disease

cvs

ischaemic heart diseases

DALY

DisabilitY-Adiusted Life Year
District Hospitals
District Nodal O{ficer Climal. Chang€

DHs

DNO-CC
ED

Emergency Department
Government of lndia
Health Action Plan
Health Care Facilities
H.zard Identilication and Risk Assessment
lndirn Council of Medical Reseerch
Information Education Communication
Indian Institute of Technoloe'|
Indian Institute of Tropic.l llteteorology
Indian Meteorolosical DeDartment
Lung Care Foundation
Liqht-Emittins Diode
Liquefied Petroleum (;as

Gol
HAP
HCFs

HIRA
ICII{ R

IEC

IIT
IITI\'I
IMD
LCF
LED
LPC

Medical OIficer
Midistry of Environment Forest and Climate Change
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Ministry of Health atrd Famih Welfare

NTO

MoEFCC
NIoES
NToHFW

National Clean Air Programme
Non-Communicable Diseases
National Centre for Disease Control
Nitrogen Oxide
Nitrosen Dioxide
National Programme on Climote Change End Huma[ Health
Out-Patient Department
Posa Craduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Choddigarh

NCAP
NCD
NCDC
NOx
NOz

NPCCHH
OPD

PGINIER

Primary Health Centers
Public Health Foundation of India
Particulate Matters
Personal Protective Equipment
Public Works Department
Pollution Under Control
Sick Buildins Syddrome
Sub-District/Divisional Hos tals

PHCs

PHFI
PM
PPE

PWD
PUC
SBS
SDHs

Smoke + Fog
State Nodal Olficers Climate Cha

SMOG
SNO-CC

SRIHER
TEG

Standard Operating Procedures
hur Dioxide
Sri Ramachandra Institute for
Technical E
G

ToT

T

UNEP
VOCs

Utrited Nations Environment Programme
Volatile
c Com unds

WB
WCD

World Bank

SOP
SOz

4lPage

ofTraincrs

Womeu and Child
World Health Assem

\lTIA

er Educstiod & Research

ment

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under IIPCCHH
5

File No. F.No,7OINCOC/CEOH&CCH/2O18-!9/APJdvisory

(Computer No. 3175972)

Gefle6ted from eomc€ by BRU tr/roHAN MAU( O/O SECY -PPs(Bl{il)-iaor.tfw. PPs. OOHFW DEPARTI',IEI{T on 3ll1ol2o25 06:45 pm

ffi@==

45]50EA / 20?S/ 169

Health Advisory on Air Pollution (NPCCHH)
What is Air Pollution and its key pollutants?
Air pollution is the contamination of the indoor or outdoor environment by any chemical, physical or
biological agent that modifies the natural characteristics of the atmosphere (WHO).
Key health harmful air pollutants include following-

o Particulate Matters (PMu.s and PMro), Carbon Monoxide (CO), ground level Ozone (O:), Volatile
Organic Compounds, metals, lerl Sulphur dioxide (SOz) and Nitrogen dioxide (NOz).

Major sources of air pollution in the country are -

i.

Ambient (outdoor) a

is from both anthropogenic and natural.

a) Industrial emissions (through fossil fuel buming/ process and fugitive emission)
b) vehicular exhaust

c) re-suspension of road dust, construction and demolition activities,
d) refuge buming (garbage, ho(iculture wastes, crop residues etc.)
e) use of solid fuels for cooking and buming offirecrackers etc.

ii.

Household flnd oor) air pollution is caused by buming biomass such as

a) wood, coa[, dung, kerosene in chulhas or fireplaces for cooking and heating purposes.

b) Others such as

o by buming mosquito coils, incense sticks, cigarettes, bidis,
. use ofsprays, solvents, and fumes Ilom chemicals used in building interiors etc.
iii.

Sick Buildinq Sl'ndrome (SBS): Building occupants experience acute health and comfort effects
which appear to be linked to time spent in a building, but no specific illness or cause can be
identifred is called Sick Building Synrlrome (SBS).

a) The complaints may be localized in a particular room or zone or may be widespread
throughout the building.

b) The major sources are inadequate ventilation, chemical and biotogical contaminants (molds
and fungi) from indoor sources or outdoor sources, dust, smoke, fumes, fabric fibers, bright or

flickering lights and problems with cleaning and layout

Understanding air quality/AQl levels and its health significance:
To avoid complexities in understanding the data and for its effective communication and to educate public
on status of air pollution and its related health perspectives, Central Pollution Control Board has launched

the mechanism of publishing Air Quatity Index (AQf depicted in easily understandablesix (6) colour
code categories with their likely health impacts as

i.
5lPage

Good

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under I\PCCHH
b

Fil. No. F.No,7oINCDC/CEOHICCH/2oIt-t9/Ap_Mvtsory (Computer No. I76922)
G€n.r.t d from eoffice by aRt, MOHAN t ALI( O/O SECY -PpS(B|{M)-MOHFW, pP6, DOHFW oEpABTMEMT on lrlrol2ozs o5:ai pm

6?ot=*

4535088/20?5/169

ll

Satisfactory

iii.

Moderately polluted

iv.

Poor
Very Poor

vi.

Severe

AOI Considerations and its siqnilicance

Air pollutants measured by real tinre analysers at Continuous Ambient Air Quality
Monitoring Stations (CAAQMS)

o First calculate moving averages of last 24 hours for individual pollutant
o Then, the AQI sub-index for a paticular pollutant is calculated and hnally, the highest
sub-index is declared as AQI of that day c,f the area or location.

AQI value nwer indicates rynergistic status of air pollution or impact of air pollution on
health; rather it indicates about most problematic air pollutant

Worsening of Air Quality Index (higher AQI value) especially of 'poor to severe' in an area may lead to
increase in health complications among those exposed particularly vulnerable populations such as children,
elderly, individuals with underlying medical conditions etc.
Therefore, a general health advisory related to AQI is issued by CPCB with AQI bulletin as in table belowTable: AQI levels, Health effects and Certain Protective Health Measures

Air Quality hdex
(AQr)#

Advice for
Possible Health Consequences
General Population

(Pollution level)
Good

No specilil lrlecaulions

Low risk

Nc, sPecial
Pter rt ttli, rtt.

(0-a{))

Satisfactory

Vulnetable Population*

Minor breathing disriomfort in

No special precautions Do less prolonged

I

(s 1- 100)

vulnerable populatidnt

or strenuous outdoor
physical exenion

or othsr health related
101-200)

ll

less prolonged or

outdoor

in wlnerable

prolonged or
outdoor physical

exertion

6lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
7

(Comput€r No. al76972)
File No, F.No.7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/20I8-19/AP-Advisory
pm
Generated tom eoffice by BRlj IIOHAN MALIK O/O SECY -PPS(BMM)'MOIIfW, PPS, DOHFW OEPARTMEir on !l/10/2o2s o5:'5

ffi@==

4535048/ZO?5/159

Poor

Breathing discornfort in healthy

\void outdoor physical Avoid outdoor physical

(201-300)

people on prolonged exposure

exertlon

actrYltres

Breathing or othcr health relate{
discomfort in vulnerable
population*on short exposure
Verry Potrt

i0l -;100)

Rcspirrtorf illness in healthv
pcrplc tu prolongctl e.xposurc

lctr\ rtlcs. esp

hvsical Rcnrai

sandk

llv

los,

aclivitv I

ProrroLrrrccd lcsPilalorv or r.rthcr

illrcsscs irr r ulnclablc populatiou'i'

latc er enin

ILl! s

r)n short c\t)(\sur'c

Scvcrc

(+01- 500)

Rcspiratory illrress in hcnlthy

.,\r oid outtloor physical Renrairr indrxrrs and keep

pcoplc urr prrlontctl cxpusurc

aclir itics

aclivily lcvcls l0\\

Sclious lcspilalor r or other
illncsscs in r ulnerable populatiorr"
orr slrul cxPosrrrc

Sameer app from CPCB is a mobile app which can provide the city level hourly update ofthe National
Air Quality Index (AQI) published by Central Pollution Control Board. Health Officials and general

public may download it for use to get information ofthe air quality level in their respective areas.

TlPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
8

File No. F.No.7oINCOC/C€OH&CCHI2O16-I9/ApJdvisory (Computer No. !t769za)

G€nerdtcd from Gofffce by BRII MoHAN i4au( o/o sEcy -pps{BMM)- oHFw. pps, ooHFw DEPARTMEm on 3.1/t,/2.,2s 06:15 pn

ffi@r*

1515A6A/2025/ 169

Health consequences of air pollution:
The health impacts of air pollution
depend on the level of pollution and
exposure duration. The individuals'
vulnerability to the health impacts of
pollution can also differ based on

E

ffi
EW

E,,hd,9h

HEALIII EFFEGIS

@ o'a oo..rt,ou

demographic factors and predisposing
health conditions.

LONG TERM EFFCTS

Short-term high-level exposures
can result in acute health reactions

with involvement of various human
organs and patients may present
with certain suggestive symptoms
like irritation of eyes, nose, throat

and skin. cough, breathing
difliculty, wheezing, chest

ll.dteO&.r
htdbrhF

Cantrol Narvosr ty.tan

6kotr)
Cordlo{rorcula, Obaorat

(H.ort Attoch)

Cor|l,tha

ldthira
frrhbth

Rarplrotory Dlraora!

(Arthno, Eron(hlIr)
Luno Cqn(ar Rlrh

discomfort, chest pain, headache,
a
giddiness, limb weakness, facial
deviation etc. Vulnerable groups
a
can experience more severe effects
such as lower respiratory tract
inflammation and infection,
exacerbation of asthma, bronchitis or exacerbation of chronic illnesses such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (Respiratory System), ischernic heart diseases (CVS), and cerebrovascular
strokes (CNS) etc. Figure 1 (in the right) shows various health effects attributed due to airpollution.

rl

I

ll

Long term exposure to even lower level ofair pollution can result in chronic illnesses ofrespiratory
and cardiovascular systems, lung cancer and premature deaths.

Vulnerable Population to health effects of air pollution:

i.
ii.
iii.

Age group: Children particularly under 5 years and old age groups
Pregnant women: Exposure during pregnancy may have consequences for child in womb.
Predisposed health 6onditions: Those with pre-existing illnesses ofrespiratory cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular systems are at higher risk

Low socio-economic conditions: Those with poor nutritional status; those living in poor housing,
using fossil fuels for cooking, heating/ lighting purposes are at risk.

Outdoor working groups: Those with possibility of prolonged exposures such as traffic
policemen, traffic volunteers, constnrction workers, road sweepers, rickshaw pullers, auto-rickshaw
drivers, roadside vendors, and others working outdoors in air polluted settings, labours working
near boilers or fumace smelters, miners etc. are at higher risk.

vl

Besides, women with burning biomass for cooking, and sweeping dust are vulnerable on account

of their household work.

8lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
9

{Comput€r No. 3lZ69Z2)
G€n€Eted from eoffl.€ by ERU MoHAN MALI|( O/O SEC1 -PP5(BMM)-MOHfW PPS, OOHFW OEPARTMEm on !l/10/2O25 06:45 pm
File No. F,No,7OINCDC/CEOHICCH/2OI3-19/AP-Advisory

7,4=

@xr

153508E/2023/169

I

I

-r

GI

J

L.

t!

@

Neonotes/
lnfonts

Children
-r

Women

-

A
g

I
\li

I

Elderly

I

Peoplewith
Underlying
Medicol
Conditions

!:f

Outdoor
Workers

I) I

/

a
,fr

,..

filt

&

Pregnont
Women

(

Trotfic Police

rl
v

L

Municipollty Workers /
Sweepers
a

Ci

1)
,t

Figure 2. Vulnerable populations to Air Pollution exposure

9 | Pag

e

Health Advisorv on Air pollution under NpCCHH
1o

File No. F,No.zolNCDC/cEoH&CCH/zot3-r9/Ap_Advisory (Comput€r No. Iz59zz)

Generated from eoffice bv sAU MoHAN MAL|(, o/o sEc./ -pps(BMM)-MoHFW, pps, DOHfW OEPARTMENT on r/rol202s 06:45 pm

ffi@rs

1S3SO88 /2025 / 169

Air Quality Early Warning System (AQEWS) for Delhi and India [Advanced
High Resolution)
Under the auspices of Ministry of Earth Sciences, lndia Meteorological Departnent (IMD) and Indian
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (II'IM have commissioned Air Quality Early Warning System (AQEWS)

for lndia. The advanced high-resolution Air Quality Early Waming System is operational specifically for
Delhi-NCR. It is also available for some specific Indian cities @une, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Kolkata, Varanasi,
Lucknow, Kanpur, Ludhi6n6,66medabad, Hyderabad, Visakhapatnam, Chennai, Coimbatore, Bhubaneswar,
Ranchi, Patna, Raipur etc.). The final forecast is made available in terms of Air Qualif Index (AQI) so that
appropriate health advisories can be issued depending on severity of the pollution levels.
AiI Qnlity Indcx at Delhi

CrElarlo - ZB
22$lcl!t L

Air Quality Forecast for Delhi in PMz's

€

Arr Qu.Uty lLtq (PM1d

MAIf,-3m
zn$rGu a

Graph showins Air Qualiw Forecasts for Delhi

The objective is: "to enable and provide air quality forecasting and information services in a harmonized
and standardized way tailored to the needs of society and

Air Quality Forecast Over India

pollution control authorities". Climate and weather factors
I
I

like wind, temperature, precipitation and other

I

meteorological factors play a key role in the poor air quality

t

L.-a

I

&

that populations face.

How to access the Air Oualitv Forecast: The Air Quality
,l

forecast spatial plots are available for the Indian region.

x

The air quality forecasts products are available at the

I

following links@s:le\rc.Eqpls9!.I6jn and
https://mausam.imd. gov.in .

State programme oflicials are to monitor the AQ forecasts regularly which are available for the respective
areas at present. Depending on severity ofthe pollution levels in their respective areas, the officers are to take

up appropriate health related actions including iszuance ofhealth advisory to increase the awareness level of
the public on the Do's and Don'ts IEC messages in the social media and other media channels. These are the
acts required to protect, prevent and control the health issues which may arise when people are exposed to air

pollution.

l0 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
11

File No. F,No.7oINCOC/CEOH&CCH/2o13_19lAP-Advisory

(Comput€r No. 3r76972)

cenerated from €office by ERU MoHAN MAU( O/O sECY -PPS(8|I|'.!)-MOHFW, PPS, OOHfW OEPARTMENT on !r/lol2o25 05,45 pm

ffi@;-s

15350EE/2025/159

Recommendations to the States (main action pointsJNPCCIIH programme Nodal Officers at State and District levels to supervise, monitor and coordinate
the activities:

State health authorities to keep a check on the tlaily air quality data in the cities particularly

NCAP cities and these are available at CPCB website or State Pollution Control Board. As
mentioned above, Sameer App. can also be used for ollaining information.

o State may coordinate witl pollution control board for developiry a system ofavailing such
air quality information in health sector regularly.

o The same air quality data may preferably be made available to health facilities (WCs,
PHCs, CHCs, SDHs and DHs and others) for health-related actions

o

Based on the air quality data, healthcare facilities may strengthen appropriate healthcare
service provisions to address health issues arising in their respective area and also, for the

outreact activities at the commuity level.

o This information is also for use in surveillance on air pollution related illnesses
Strengthening of Healthcare seryices to address the air pollution related health issues

a) Public Awareness Generation
IEC materials

. Posters, GIFs, Audio-Video Spots, Social media messages (Prototypes at NCDC website)
o Locally translated,/created IEC materials
. IEC messages (Annexure I)
o Social Media Messages (Annexure II)
IEC dissemination plans

o Timing: For example- Winter months (Sept.-Oct to Feb.-March)
- Pre and Post Diwali
- Stubble Buming Days
- SMOG (Smoke + Fog)- Fog admix with polluted air (Hazardous to health)
- Intemational Days related to Envirorunent and Health such as Intemational Day of Clean
Air for blue skies (7th September) every year

r Channels for disseminations- Social media - Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, you Tube, WhatsApp
- Posters, Wall paintings, Street playvNukkad Natak
- Radio Television channels (AIR, Door Darshan, FM channels)
- Public means of transport vehicles- Bus etc.
11 lP age

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
12

Fll! No, F.No.7ol CDC/CEOHaCCH/2orE-r9/ap_advisory (computer No. alr6972)
Gensated ftoln .offlc€ by ERtl MoHAN MAUK o/o sEcy -pps(Br,|rq)-MoHrw, pps, DoHFw oEpaRTuENT on
at/to/2o25 6:15 pm

ffi".(Dr*

15t50EE/2025/169

- Competitions (Painting, Quiz, Debates, Symposium)
- Key Public Officials and Senior officials
- Experts and Panel discussion
b) Capacitv buildins of the health sector including healthcare facilities -

o Development ofan action plan in health sector (District level, city level etc.)
. Training calendar- Programme officials, Surveillance Nodal ofhcers, Community level
workers etc.

.

Training modules development and its conduction of the ToTs, Programme officials, MOs,
Paramedics, CHOs, Community Health Workers, Surveillance Nodal Officers etc.

c) Surveillance Strengtheninq and Monitorin g in the State: NPCCHH programme officials
at the State (SNO-CC) and District (DNO-CC) roles are

-

o To establish and expand sentinel surveillance on air pollution related illnesses in the state
particularly NCAP cities.

. To establish sentinel hospitals for surveillance and identifu hospital nodal oflicers
o Each sentinel hospital to report regarding daily air pollution related illness cases attending
the emergency department to DNO-CC regularly/ timely.

o Each DNO to monitor reports from sentinel sites; analyse statistics ofillnesses related to
air pollution and share to the State and Central level for timely actions.

(Details in the SOP of Surveillance on air pollution related illnesses is available at
NPCCHH website)

d) Health sector response mechanisms - Healthcare facilities strengthening

o Doctors/Staffs orientation on the issues, strengthening support to manage cases
attributed to air pollution

. Patient care service areas
- OPD services (mainly General OPDs, Medicine, Paediatrics, Respiratory Medicine,
Cardiology and Neurology etc.)

- Emergency services and Referral Services
- Amhulance services
- Outreach services
o Medications availability- acute respiratory/ cardiovascular/ cerebrovascular etc.
o Diagnostic/LaboratorySen'ices
. Medical equipment's like oxygen supply, nebulizers, ventilators
. Hospital beds, Sketchers, Wheelchairs, Ambulances
. Referral mechanisms

12 lPage

Ilealth Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH

File No. F.No.ZOlNCDC/CEOH&CCH/2O13-r9/AP-Advisory

13
(Computer No. 1176972)

cen€rated from eoffic€ by 8RU MOHAN MAU( O/O SECY -PPS(BM|'|)-|'/IOHFW, PPS, DOHfW OEPARTMEm on 3lllol2025 o5:/ts pm

TE

@nis

45 35044/ 2025 / 159

Provision of services for Air Pollution-Related Cardio-Pulmonarv Illness throuph the soecial CHEST
Clinic
The purpose of the CHEST clinic is

o Screening ud risk communication for air pollution-related cardio-pulmonary diseases
. Among patients already suffering from cardio-pulmonary illnesses- establish possible causes
(including Air Pollution) and confirm diagnosis

o Provide standard care to patients suffering from cardio-pulmonary illnesses
o Promote behaviour change and adoption of healthy practices to potential and diagnosed cases of
air pollution-related cardio-pulmonary illnesses

A) SETTTNG uP A crrEsr clrNrc
CHEST Clinic may be established at CHC, SDH (Subject to the availability of specialists), District hospitals,
and Medical Colleges in urban areas, covering all such facilities in NCAP cities initially. (Reference:
Pollution Control Board data).

During the peak air pollution months (usually from Septenber to March) , the clinics are expected to function
for a fixed duration of at least ttvo hours daily.

B) SCREENTNG oF pATrf,NTs tr'oR RtsK FAcToRs
The staff nurse posted in the clinic would also be responsible for screening the patients to ascertain risk factors

using a standard proforma. A register of individuals identified as being at high risk is to be maintained, and
details of the high-risk individuals may also be shared with the respective blocks for community-based
follow-up through ASHA, ANM, and CHO.

C) CoMTRMATToN or DrAGNosrs AND pRo\.rsroN oF CARE
Based on the clinical evaluation (including history, examination, and evaluation), a diagnosis may be arrived
at and recorded utilising ICD Code in the CHEST Clinic register. Provision of standard care may be initiated
on an outpatient basis or in the casualty/emergency/ward,/ICU as per need. The Standard Treatment workflow

for Pulmonology by ICMR (2019) may be used for the same.

D) Fol,t,ow-up AND cor{Trr\ruuM oF CARE
The patient and at-risk individuals may be linked to their respective HWC, PHC, and CHC for continuation
of medications and follow-up. For stable patients, a follow-up at the CHEST Clinic may be scheduled once
a quarter or once in six months, as decided by the treating physician.

E) RECOND MAINTENANCE AND REPoRTING
All the aforementioned formats need to be maintained by the Staff nurse under the overall supervision ofthe
Chest Physician/Physiciar/GDMO. A summary of the collated data can be collected through State/nationallevel digital tools. such as IHIP.

F) LINKAGE WITH oTHT,R PRoGRAMMES/SERVICES
The CHEST clinic can be combined with the NCD Clinic, operated under the NP-NCD. In the presence of
specific risk factors, bi-directional referral is encouraged between the CHEST Clinic, Tobacco Cessation
clinics, and the TB Unit.

13 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
14

File No. f.No.7oINCOC/CEOH&CCHIaol8-r9/Ap_Advisory (Computer No. 3t769z2)

Gen€rated from €office bv BRr MoHAN MAUK o,/o sEcy -pps(Bt{M)-MoHFw. pps, ooHFw DEPaRTMENT on at/torzo2s o5:1s 9m

ffi"(D=g-

45 )5048 / ?O?5 / 159

Health Sector Response Acrion Plans
During high level of air pollution (particularly post-Diwali, Stubble buming and Winter days/ months
(SMOG) in State/ Districti City)
Certain considerations (7 points) for Health Sector Responses -

r
.

Health Department to activate the action plan during higher AQI levels

Health Deparhent may increase to coordinate with concemed deparEnents for IEC Campaigns
(Environment, Pollution Board, Transport, Urban development, Coal, Power, PWD (construction
related works), Municipality/ Panchayat, Traffic Departrnent, WCD, Labour departrnent etc.)

o Health Departments including healthcare facilities to strictly monitor daily AQI levels during such
high air pollution days/ months as reported from pollution control boards. Health Facilities may
provide daily AQI value to infom people and measures to protect, prevent aud control themselves
from air pollution.

o Strengthening further public awareness campaigns in health sector (increasing frequency/ channels
of dissemination to reach the target populations who are likely to have more health issues due to
exposure to air pollution - School children, College students, Elderly, Women, Patients with
underlying medical cooditions of respiratory, cardiovascular, cerebrovascular diseases, outdoor
exposures; vulnerable hot spot areas).

o Strengthening ofhealthcare services provisions- Patient care services at the Emergency departrnents;
Outdoor departrnents etc.; Availability of medications/ equipment's in the ED/ OPDs to treat the
illnesses; Human resources to attend patient care in departments; Logistics; Enhancsment ofbeds if
required in (ED). These may be appropriately taken up at differant levels of healthcare facilities at
WCs, PHCs, CHCs, SDHs, DHs and others tertiary cares

r

Strict Monitoring ofthe sentinel surveillance reports; t)?es ofincreasing cases reporting in the health
care facilities @espiratory cases, Cardiovascular, cerebrovascular cases). This information to share

with concerned deparfirents and Hospitals/ Healthcare Facilities for actions to take.

.

Engagements of Civil Societies/ Private facilities to support in addressing the issue.

Health Adaptation Plan on air pollution and health (State/ District level):
State/ Districts to finalize action plan to address on air pollution related illnesses

State and District Task Force on Climate Change and Health may coordinate with concerned
departments to finalize action plan on air pollution related illnesses

The Health Action Plan for state/ district/ cities may include actions to achieve programme
objectives

Air pollution issues in the State including non-attainment cities identified

- Name of the non-attainment cities
System to avail daily air quatity data in health sector from pollution control board and sharing
the same with the healthcare facilities
Awareness Generation and its dissonination plarming (IECs, public health advisories, translated
IECs, dissemination channels and areas identified)
14 lP age

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCIIH
15

(computer No. !176972)
File No. F.No.7olNcoc/cEoH&ccH/2o13'19/AP-Advisorv
G€ne€t€d from eotria€ by aRU EoHAN MAUK O/O sECY -PPS(BI{U)-MOHFW' PPS. OOHFW DEPARTMENI on llllol2o25 06:45 pm

ffi@rs

45 350EE / 2025 / 159

Capacity building activities (Modules and Training of DNO-CCs, Medical Officers,
Paramedics, Community level health workers) -at HCFs in the State

Surveillance strengthening on air pollution related illnesses (cities, hospitals, nodal offrcers,
training, surveillance data, its analysis and actions
Health-sector preparedness and response action plans
Details of Rolesi Responsibilities of healthcare personnel
Inter-sectoral coordination mechanisms (Health and Non-Health)

Health sector's response in context of CPCB's "Graded Response Action Plan"
In view of the serious concem and urgent action requirements to address the high level of air pollution in

Delhi & NCR, a Graded Response Action Plan and appropriate measures based on air pollution levels was
notified in 2017 under the MoEFCC. It has an added new category of"Severe+ or Emergency" in the
previous 6 AQI categories. It defmed various mitigating and adapting activities as gmded response actions
to address the higher level ofair pollution and identified the respective implementing agencies from
concerned Ministries and Departrrents. Its detail is available at
ht ps : //cpcb. nic. in/up I o ads /fi nal graded _table. pdf

Health sector in Delhi NCR region (Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh) may do -

i.

State NPCCHH programme officials may coordinate with implementing agencies as mentioned

in the action plan for the purpose of awareness qeneration of health issues associated with air
pollution among the people.
These concemed departments may be considered as members for State/

stnct evel Task Force

under NPCCHH programme for taking support/ inter-sectoral coordination in addressing the
issues in the State/Districts ofthese regions.

15 lPage

Ilealth Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCIIH
16

File No, F.No.7OIi|CDC/C€OH&CCH/2OIa-t9/AP_Advisory

(Computer ilo. 3t25972)

Gene6ted from.Offfce by BAU IloHAN i{AUK O/o SECY -PP5{Eili,)-ilOHFw, PPS, DOHFW oEpARTMEtrtT on lt/tolzozs ci6:L p6

Iffi@=*

45350E8/2025/169

Annexure I: IEC messages for Public Awareness on Air Pollution and Health
Concerns under NPCCHH
Target Population-

- General population and
- Vulnerable groups such as children. elderly and those with underlying medical conditions
- Optional interventional choices
I.

General Population:
Reduce risk tiom exposure to ail pollutants by tr:rking up the following measures

-

Avoid pref'erably places with high air pollution like roads with slorv & heavy traffic. areas near
potluting industries, construction-demolition sites.

1. Avoid outdoor moming and late evening ',valk. run, jog and physical exercise, Do not open
extemal doors and windows during moming and late evening hours, it may ventilate if necessary,
between l2 p.m. to 4 p.rn. in aftemoon (Da1,s with poor to severe AQ[)

2. Avoid buming biomass such as woo<[, coal, animal dung, kerosene. Use clean smokeless fuels
(gas or electricity) for cooking and heating purposes. If using biornass, use clean cook stoves.

3. Avoid buming oiwood/ charcoal in'Anghiti' during winters, in closed and confined condition
which may be fatal due to CO and builcup COu

4. Avoid use of room fresheners, it has ill effects as it consume O: in vicinity very fast.
5. Avoid burnins firecrackers.

6. Avoid burning in open any fonn of wood, lcaves, crop residues, & waste.
7. Do not smoke cigarettes, bidis and lelated tobacco products.
8. Avoid buming mosquito coils and incense sticks in closed premises.
9. Reschedule outdoor activities as per AQI, and remain indoors on days with poor to severe AQl.
10. Practice wet mopping instead of s'*.eeping or vacuum cleaning inside homes. Ifyou choose to use

vacuum cleaner. use those having uigh Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filter
I 1. Keep washing your eyes with running water regularly and do regular gargles with wann water
t 2. Consult the nearest doctor in case

I

of bleathlessness, giddiness, cough, chest discomtbrt or pail,

irritation in eyes (red or watery)
13. As a "no-regret" strategy, healthy diet. with fruit and vegetables rich in antioxidatrts, and adequate

arnount ofhydration by drinking vvater is advocated.

16 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
17

File No. F,No.7olNcDc/cEoH&ccH/2or3-rg/APJdvisory (computer No. 3125972)
GeneEted from €office by 8Rt, MoHAN MAL|K, O/O SEC1 -PP5(BMM)-MOHfW. PPS. DOHFW DEPARTMENT on at/1O/2O25 06,14 Pr

ffi@**

45350aE/?O25/159

lL

Those with underlying medical conditions particularly chronic pulmonary or cardiovascu

problems should have following additional measures
1. Be more careful to avoid exposure to air pollution

2. Avoid any soenuous activity and stay indool during higher AQI levels
3. Keep a check on exacerbalions o{ suggestive symptoms
4. Properly follow doctor's instructions on healthcare
5. Keep the plescribed medications readily available
6- Seek immediate medical advice if syrnptorrs worsen.

III.

Optional choices (Face Mask. Air Purifiers. Air Conditioners)

l. lf you choose to use f'ace rnask, the disposable N95 or N99 is useful provided user instructions
are ibllowed. These rnasks may help provided the period of exposure is shon. Masks should

have proper fitting on users' mouth antl nose. Ensure to replace the masks after usage as
inshucted. Paper masks, handkerchieli, scan'es and cloth are not effective.

2. Ifyou choose to use air purifier, follow manuf'acturers' guidelines, however it may be advised to
have expert's consultation on suitability, positioning, technology selection and cleaning capacity
(area coverage). Ensure to replace and clean lllters as instructed. Avoid using an air purifier that

works by generating ozone. as it increases pollution inside rooms.

3. When operating air conditioners irr buildings or vehicle, use in "re-circulate" mode to avoid
contact with outside air.

IV.

IEC materials (Posters, GIFs, Audio Spots and Video Spots) are available at NCDC website

1. Link to find them- https://ncdc.mohfw.gov.inlcentre-for-environmental-occupational-health-climatechange-health/

lTlPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under I\IPCCHH
18

Filc No- F.iloTo/NCoc/CEOH&CCH/2o13-t9/AplAdvisory (computer No, 3t7G972)
G€n€r.t d trom a(Ifice by BRIJ llOHAl{ MAUK, O/O SECY -PP5(Blllr)-i|OHFW PPs, DOHfw DEPARTMEIiIT on lrltol2025 o6j45 pm

Iffi_o=*

4535088/?O25/169

Annexure II:-Social Media Messages under NPCCHH
l. Check the daily Air Quality Index (AQI) ofyour area before planning your day out.
2. Avoid places with high air pollution like roads .,vith slow & heavy tralfic areas near polluting areas
to rninimize exposure to air pollution,

3. Avoid construction-demolition sites, coal-based power plants, brick kilns etc. to minimize exposure
to air pollution

4. On days of poor to severe plus air pollution (AQI>200)
a) avoid outdoor moming & late evening walk
b) avoidjogging, running or other exertional physical activities
c) avoid opening external doors and windows during moming and late evening hours.
d) ventilate rooms, if necessary, between l2 p.m. to 4 p.m. in aftemoon
e) remains indoors, ald reschedule outdoor activities as per AQI levels

fl if person experiences breathlessness, cough, chest discomfort or pain, giddiness, irritation
in eyes (red or watery) - consult the nearest doctor irnmediately.

g) high risk people like pregnant women, young children and elderly should restrict outdoor
movements as far as possible.

5. Avoid burning in the open environment ofany form ofwood, leaves, crop residues, and waste which
can furtherworsen air pollution

6. Practice wet mopping instead of sweeping or vacuum inside homes to reduce exposure to air
poIlution.

7. Avoid burning firecrackers
8. To reduce the harmful effects ofair pollution, eat seasonal fiuits and vegetables rich in antioxidants
and drink adequate water to maintain hydration.

9. Patients with chronic pulmonary or cardiovascular problerns, pregnant women, young children and
elderly people should be more careful and avoid exposure Io air pollution.
10. On days ofpoor to severe plus air pollution avoid any strenuous activity by persons with chronic

cardio-pulmonary disease.
t

i

lSlPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
19

Fil€ No. F.No,7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/2O!8-19/AP-Advisory

(Computer No. !176972)

Gener.ted from eofflce by BR! MoHAN MALII( o/o SECY _PPs(Bl{!l)-l',loHFw, PPS, DoHFw DEPARTI{Em on 3lllol2045 06:.5 pm

ff*(Dnr

4535088/2025/159

11. Patients with chronic pulmonary and cardio vascular disease should keep their prescribed

medicines readily available while going outdoors on poor to severe plus air pollution days
(AQr>200).
12. Patients with ckonic pulmonary and cardio vascular disease should keep a check on
exacerbation of symptoms on poor to severe plus air pollution days (AQI>200).
13. Patients with chronic pulmonary and cardio vascular disease could seek imrnediate medical
advice if symptoms worsen during poor to se vere plus air pollution days (AQl>200).
14. On days ofpoor to severe plus air pollution (\QI>200) consider use of close fitted N95 orN99
masks to reduce exposure to air pollution.
15. On days ofpoor to severe plus air pollution (r\QI>200) use ofair purifiers may be beneficial to
reduce the effects oI air pollution.
16. Avoid uses ofair purifiers that works by generating ozone and other harmful byproducts as they
increase indoor air pollution.
17. Air conditioners in buildings and vehicles may use "re-circulate" mode to avoid contact with
outside polluted air on days ofpoor to severe plus air pollution (AQI>200).

18. Stop smoking cigarettes, bidis and olher related tobacco products which aggravate ill eflects of
air pollution.
19. When the air pollution level is poor to severe plus (AQI>200), &ive the vehicle with windows
closed to minimize exposure to air pollution.

20. Use public transport whenever possible to reduce air pollution.
21. \[hen the air pollution level is poor to severe plus (AQI>200), if someone experiences cough,
wheezing, chest tightness - level of exertional activity should be decreased or stopped and
immediately consult to nearest doctor.

22. Follow local air quality forecasts before planning to outdoor activity.
23. Ensure cooking areas are well ventilated with cross ventilation by opening windows, doors to
reduce exposure to household air pollution.

24. Avoid buming mosquito coils and incense sticks in closed pr€nrises to reduce exposure to
indoor air pollution.

25. Avoid spending long periods of time in busy routes in poor to severe plus air pollution days.
26. Avoid exercising near high traffic areas where exposure to air pollution is usually high.
27. Act in time, protect yourself from ill effects c,f air pollution.

19 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
20

Fll€ No. f. o.7olNCoC/CEOH&CCH/2ot8-rt/Ap_Mvtsory

(CorhDuter No. 3tz697a)

G.n.r.t.d trom cofflc€ by BRl, MoHAN MAU( o,/o sEcY -PPS{BMM)-MoHFW, PPS. DOHFW OEPARTMEI,IT on 3tltol2o25 06:,15 pm

ff*Or:=

+5 35088 / 2023 / 159

28. Pollution due to fire-cracker burning can seriously impact liealth of person's suffering fiom
cardiovascular, respiratory diseases.

29. Avoid fire-crackers buming especially by people suffering from asthma or another lung disease.
30. Stay indoor during nights of Diwali to reduce exposure to air pollution.
31. Wear a mask (N95 or N99) to reduce exposure to air pollution by fire-crackers.

32. If a person develops breathing diffrculty during Diwali, consult to doctor immediately.
33. When complete escape from air pollution is ,liffrcult, taking some measures can provide you a
certain level ofprotection from its hamful el'fects on your health.

34. Increased air pollution level can have maior health consequences. Do check the AQI before
planning your outdoor activities for the day. Website to check AQI: CPCB

35. It rnakes such a difference to live in a green and healthy cityl Become aware & Act now
36. Vulnerable population are the highest risk oftheir health being affected due to Air Pollution.
These rulnerable groups should avoid outdoor physical activities when Air Quality is poor to
severe.

37. Choose green to breathe clean: Plantjng more trees can reduce the effect of air pollution on
health. Head towards a pollution ftee lomorr,:w with every tree you plant.

Note please: Hash tags may be considered to coordirrate with relevant Ministries/ departments/
Institutes/ Organizations like Cenhal/ State Pollution Control Board, Environnent, NPCCHH

Programfie etc.

20 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
21

(Comput€r No. al76972)
Flle No. F.No.7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/2Orr-19/AP-Advisory
Generatcd from.ofice by BRU MOHAN !|AUK O/O SECY -PPS(B|,|I'/IIMOHFW' PPs, OOHFW OfPARWEIT on 3lltol4o25 O6:4s pm

ffi@--s

45i5088/2025/\69

Annexure III: Health Advisory for household air pollution
l. To minimise pollution by mitigating or reducing from sources -

i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

Cooking with solid fuels like firewood, cow dungs, coal and kerosene etc.
Heating purposes during colder or winter days from solid fossil fuels

Lighting purposes from kerosene lamps etc.
Smoke from mosquito coils or incense sticks during poor air quality days

Smoking of cigarettes, bidis, traditional hookah etc.
Outside pollution sources - nearby construction sites, and materials like paints, and composite

wood products; vehicular exhausts in houses nearby the roads

vii.

Buming ofwastes, crop residues, plastics, bottles and food wrappers etc.

2. Adoption of better practices while cooking in Kitchen or at homes

i.
ii.

Use of cleaner fuels (LPG, electronic based)

To ventilate air adequately to reduce smoke properly during cooking (opening windows or

doors; use of exhausts fan)

iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.

Avoid to bum fossil fuels and ifto do, use open spaces or small pieces ofwood
To minimise cooking hours by prior soaking offoods ifpossible

During poor air quality level, to avoid cooking causing smoke or to shift timing ifpossible
To take breaks for clean air while cooking ifpossible
To cover pots and bottom cleansed for faster cooking and efficiency
Women to make elderly, children stay away from polluting sources

3. Considerations in other household areas and vicinity during polluted air levels

i.

To use energy efficient measures like LED bulbs or other electronic devices at homes

lt.

To ventilate properly by opening doors/ windows wherever possible; restrict if air quality is

poor

iii.

Avoid buming fossil fuels having smoke inside houses for heating and lighting purposes

iv.

Restrict sweeping causing dust particles in air; timings may change to aftemoon
Use damp sweeping/ clothes for cleaning floors and surfaces

vi.

Avoid havan indoor when air quality level is poor

vii.

Reduce air fresheners, sprays and mosquito coils and sprays ifpoor air quality

viii.

Do not bum crop residue or wastes causing smoke

ix.

Discourage visitors/ family members from smoking tobacco/ hookah indoor or vicinity

21 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
22

f

lle o. F, o.7olNcDc/CEoHtccH/zor8-i9/rrpJdvi5ory

(Computer No. !tzi9r2)

G.nGr.tGd from eoff.e by BRI MOHAN uAUt( O,/O 5EC1 -PPS{BMM)-MOHFW, pps, DOHFW DEPARTUEm on 3lltolao25 06:.5 pm

ffiO**

4535AEE/2025/159

Annexure IV: Health Advisory on air pollution for School Children
1. School health authorities, head, teachers and parents to develop mechanisms to create awareness and
motivate in adopting better practices among students to mitigate and adapt on air pollution.

2. Children to be awarded by organising activities and events on air pollution at school level -

i) Areas- Cities and urban areas are more likely for outside pollution levels
ii) Season/ days- Colder winter seasons/ days in cities/ urban; Diwali/ Dust storm
iii) Timings- Moming and evening hours if SMOG is prevailing and sunlight not visible
iv) Sites for precautions - transit from home to school, near school gates, and outdooring

v) Younger children, respiratory health issues, medically underlying conditions are more
vulnerable and to take more precautionary measures from risk exposure/ attacks

3. Adoption of vehicles for school (cars, vans, school buses) to reduce emissions/ air pollution

i) School buses (to encourage)
ii) Public transport (to encourage)
iii) To adopt cleaner fuels like CNGs
iv) Car-pooling (to encourage)

v) Electric cars
vi) To adopt use ofbicycles by bigger children appropriately

4. To minimise exposure to air pollution among school children -

i) Sho(er school distance to prefer
ii) To stay away from polluted sources like vehicular exhausts during transit to school or dusty
environments at school by covering nose with cloth or mask

iii) Ensure proper classroom ventilation by opening windows properly or installing exhaust fans
iv) To close windows if air quality level is poor and above

v) To adopt wet mopping for floor cleaning in school or before students arrive to school
vi) Marker pens may be used for writing on board instead ofchalks.

5. Precautions and avoidance of outdoor activities in school if AQI levels is poor and above

i) To display, ifpossible, to students/ teachers ofAQI levels and alert
ii) Schools to limit outdoor activities during days of higher pollution levels
iii) During break sessions, stay indoors and minimize outdoor exposure
iv) Physical activities like running, jogging, playing may be avoided or postponed
v) School activities, functions, celebrations and even birthday celebrations if possible

6. Medical o{ficials/ staffs at school to sensitise on air pollution related health issues and ways to
manage such cases for support also from nearby emergency health facilities if required.

22 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under |IPCCIIH

File No. F,No.7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/2Oj3-rg/AP-Advisory

,.),
{Comput€r No. 3176972)

Gene6ted from €offce by BRU MOHAN MALI( O/O SECY -PPS(8MM)-MOHFW. PPs, OOHTW OEPARTMENT on 3ll10/20e5 05:45 pm

ff*@r*

4535084/20?5/159

Annexure V: Advisory for construction and demolition workers
The construction and demolition activities cause the air pollution in following ways:

o Dust emission: The operation of machinery, dernolition activities, and the loading and
unloading of goods emit suspended particulate mauer (PMIO, PM2.5, and PMl) that pose
health concems upon inhalation.

.

Emissions from machines: Construction machinery, such as bulldozers, trucks, and
generators, usually run on diesel fuel. These emit pollutants like nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon

moooxide (CO), volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and fine particulate matter.

o Transportation of construction mrterial: The management of construction materials
significantly intensifies pollution levels, particularly particle matter that can cause serious
health problems. The larger heavier particles settle out ofthe air quickly and are hazardous to
tho operators ofplant and equipment (on-site) and to those in the immediate vicinity (off-site).

The frner small particles (usually invisible) are transported further causing health hazards (offsite).

The impact of air pollution at construction site can be minimized upon following preventive
measures:

I

Suggestive measures/practices for employer to strengthen the workforcel

i) Sensitization of workers (skilled or unskilled labour) on health, safety and environmental
protection.

ii) Training of all workers on the potential health risks associated with air pollution, air quality
index (AQI), expected hazards of air pollution due to prolonged exposure.

iii) Training of workers operating a motor vehicle on the job (on or off premises) on vehicle
maintenance to ensure operation of vehicle within emission norms and minimize air

pollution.

iv) Awareness program for workers on implementation of emergency preparedness plan based
on Disaster Management Plan. This will ensure workers are prepared to respond to
emergencies effectively.

v) Training on the correct selection, use, and maintenance of Personal Protective Equipmant
(PPE) is essential. Workers should be equipped with appropriate PPE, such as face masks

and respirators, to protect themselves from airborne pollutants and other site-specific
hazards.

lSafety Manual for Construction Workers, Labour Depanment,

23 lPage

Directorate oflndustrial Safety and Health

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
24

Flle No. F,No.7oINCOC/CEOH&CCH/2o18-19/AP_Advisory

(Computer No, 3t75972)

G.n.r.t€d ftom eotrice by BR! MoHAN lvtALlK o/o SEGY -PP5(Bil!l)-uoHfw.

PPs. ooHFuI DEPaRTMEiJT on 3rlrol2o2s 06:/15 pm

ffiOrr

1535088/ ?O2S/t69

vi) Training of workers and staff on the identification ofhealth issues or respiratory problems
(such as coughing and dyspnoea). Prompt medical attention should be encouraged for any

workers showing signs ofrespiratory distress.

vii)Conduct regular health check-ups at the construction site to monitor lung function using
spirometer/peak flow meter. This will help identifu any early signs of respiratory or other

pollution-related health issues.

viii) The workers need to be shifted/rotated in different job operations or different tasks to
minimize extended exposure to high-dust environments.

ix) Provide regular breaks depending upon the assigned task for workers to reduce the harmful
impact of air pollution on health.

2. Adoption of better behavioural practices for construction workers2

i) Use the dust masks or personal protection provided by the management to safeguard against
the inhalation of fine particulate matter (PM2.5), dust, and odours. In the absence ofPPE,

cloth mask or bandana may be used to cover nose and mouth when working in dusty
conditions.

ii) Workers shall wear long-sleeved shirts and full-length trousers to minimize skin exposure
to dust.

iii) All workers are advised to consistently use safety goggles to protect their eyes from
irritation caused by dust, debris, and exposure to chemicals.

iv) Gloves and coveralls must be wom to prevent direct contact with hazardous materials like
asbestos, concrete dust, and chemicals. Proper protective clothing helps protect the skin

from irritation and minimizes the risk of exposure to toxic substances.

v) Workers should maintain personal hygiene including regular hand and face wash with clean
water, especially before eating, changing outer layer of clothing before going home and
bath or shower after work to remove dust from your skin and hair.

vi) Workers are advised to ensure adequate water intake to facilitate toxin elimination and
support overall health, as dehydration can exacerbate the effects of pollution (at least 2
litres).

vii)Food intake should include balanced diet including fruits, local vegetables, cereals, pulses
and milk products, which provide all nutrients in adequate proportion3. The spices like
turmeric, cumin, coriander, and ginger have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties

2Proceedings

ol186 d*ting oISEAC held o. ?6.11.1019

lhftps://www.nin,res.irVdownloadr/DietarvCuidelinesforNlNwebsrte.pdf

24 | P a g

e

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH

File No, F.No,7OINCOC/CEOH&CCH/2Or3-19/APJdvisory

25
(Computer No. 3125972)

cenerated frorn eomce by 8Rt, T OHAN MALIK O/O SECY -PP5(BMM)-!{OHfW.

PPS, OOHFW DEPARTMEI{T

on 3lllol2o25 o5:,ts pm

ffi@n*

15350E8/ ?O2S / 169

that help in counteracting the effects of pollutiona, and jaggery provide ton and other
minerals that help in detoxifting the body5.

viii) Workers are advised to pay attention to the symptoms like persistent coughing,
w[s62ing, or difficulty in breathing and seek medical attention if these symptoms persist or
worsen,

3. Development of better operational practices for construction workers6,T

i) Regular use ofwater sprinkling or fine sprays from nozzles should be adopted to suppress
dust at the site, preventing its resuspension into the air.

ii) Construction & Demolition wastes or construction material whether stored or transported
(Lorries / tractors) to be preferably covered.

iii) Areas where loading / unloading (fugitive dust) activities should be demarcated and located
in areas where dust dispersal can be minimized.

iv) Equipment such as conveyor belts, crushers, and other machinery used on site that generates
dust should be operated with water sprinklers to minimize emissions.

v) Conduct regular maintenance check ofGensets (DG sets) to ensure low emissions.
vi) All vehicles used for transporting materials should be well-maintained and comply with
Pollution Under Control (PUC) certifications to ensure minimal emissions.
vii) Dry sweeping ofwork areas to be prohibited.

viii) Transport & stored material that are easily carried by the wind need to be covered by a
sheet made of eitherjute, tarpaulin, plastic or any other effective material.

ix) The paints, solvents, and other hazardous substances are needed to be securely stored in
sealed containers to prevent vapor emission.

x) The intensive activities that cause significant pollution such as demolition and excavation
should be avoided during elevated pollution levels (e.g., early momings or late aftemoons
in urban areas with significant traffic pollution).

xi) The air quality required to be monitored regularly to detect pollutant concentrations and
initiate measures when levels surpass safety limits.

xii)Provisions should be available for any medical assistance including investigations, and
treatment for workers involved in construction activities, handling materials and debris
associated with dust emissions.

a

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC56

I 8098/

t https://www. sciencedirect-corn /science/articl€/abVpii,ts97 8O l2 8l 69l 8 600O l 6O
6

Guidelines on dust mitigation measures in handing construction material and Construction & demolition waste
Tcraded Response Action Pla[ (sce - http://cpcb.nic.in/fina]
eraded_tabte.pdo

25 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
26

Flle No. F.No.7oI|{COC/CEOH!CCH./2ot3-rr/Ap_Advisory (Computer No. !126972)

G.ncmt d ftnr' eoffr.e by BRU MoHAN MAU( o/o sE{Y -PPs(Birr{)-itoHrav.

PPs, ooHFw DEpaRTltEtitT on lr/to/zozs 06:,15 pm

ffi"@**

45350EE/2025/169

ANNEXURE VI: Chest Clinic

L

Risk Assessment for Air Pollution-Related Cardio-pulmonarv Illnesses:

Name of IndividuaVPatient:

Gender: Male/Female

Age

Block:

Address:
Phone Number

Habit of Smoking

Type of Fuel is used for cooking/heating

lndoor pollutants (incense, mosquito
coils) used in the home/school/workplace?
Lack of proper ventilation at place of
residence/study/work
Occupational Exposure

Exposure at the place of
residence/study or at work due to

Family history of Cardio-pulmonary
conditions in the family
Protective behaviours
1. Do you monitor/follow updates on Air
quality through an app/website
2. Do you avoid outdoor activities during
poor air quality
3. Do you use N95 or equivalent masks
during high pollution periods

25lPage

o ln the past
o Never
o Daily
o Sometimes
o Second Hand
o Firewood
o Crop Residue
o Cow Dung Cake
o Coal
o Kerosene
o LPG
o Electric
o Solar
o Yes
oNo

o Yes
oNo

o Crop Residue burning
o Mining/Smelter
o Burning of Garbage- leaves
o Traffic Police
o Brick kiln workers
o Glass factory worker
o Construction workers
o Manufacturinq
o Affected By Forest Fires
o Has Frequent Dust Storms
o Has Thermal Power Plants
o Heavy lndustries
o Landfills
o Unpaved Roads/Major
Road/Highway
o Known For Poor Air Quality Or

o

Frequent Smog
Yes

oNo

o Yes/ No
o Yes/ No
o Yes/ No

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH

File No. F.No.7OlNCDC/CEOHICCH/2Or3-rg/APJdvisory (Computer No. llZ69/?)

cener.t€d from Goffice by aRU IoHAN MALTK O/O SEC.r -PP5(BMM)-MOHf!V, PPs, DOHfW DEPARTIiIETI on :rrlrol2025 O6:/ts pm

ffi@r*

153504E/20?5/159

ll.

CHEST clinic Format l- Line

of individuals accessins services

Name of the Hospital:

Date:

District:
Name of Duty Doctor:
Name of
A
G
Village
lndividual/Patient and
e
s
Phone #
e
n

Block:
Name of StaffNurse:
t.

N

o

State:

B

lock

d

e

I

lll.

Risk
Factor
(Yes/No), lf
yesMention
code

Diagnos
is if
symptomatic

CHEST Clinic Format 2- Summarv reporting (Dailv)

Name of the Hospital:

Date:

Type of Facility: CHC/SDtVDtVMedical College/Others (Specift):
District:
Name of
Name of Duty Doctor:

State:

Block:
StaffNurse:

Adult

Paedi
atric
M

F
M

No. of persons screened during the day:
Cumulative no. of persons screened:
No. of persons with exposure to Air Pollution:
Cumulative no. of persons with exposure to Air
Pollution
No. of persons provided risk-based counselling to
reduce exposure
Cumulative no. of persons provided risk-based
counselling:
No. of new cardio-pulmonary illnesses diagnosed
during the day
No. of new cases put on treatment
Cumulative no. of cardio-pulmonary illnesses
diagnosed
Cumulative no. of cases put on treatment
No. of cases on follow-up for Standard of Care (As of

III

dale)
No. of patients for refill of dru S As of date
Cumulative no. of patients lost to follow-u p

2TlPage

F

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH
28

Flle No. F.No.7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/2or3-rg/ApJdvisory (Comput€r No. 3rz69z2)

Gcn€ated from €Offic€ by BAU MOHAN MAUK O/O SECY -PP5{BIqlll)-llOHfw. PPs, DOHFW OEPARTI{EI{T on 3rlrol2o25 o6:.s pm

r
rffi.o*l

451308E / 2025/ 169

ICD Code for various Cardio-pulmonary Conditions
ICD Code

Condition
Asymptomatic case with Contact with and (suspected) exposure to air pollution

277.110

llution
matic with su
cted or confirmed E osure to air
Acute res irato infections or exacerbations
Acute lower res irato tract infections
Acute exacerbation of Asthma
Acute infections of lnfluenza
Pneumonia (Viral/Bacterial)
irato diseases
Acute on Chronic
Acute Exacerbation of Obstructive Lunq Disease and Bronchiectasis
Acute respiratorv distress svndrome (ARDS)
Alle ic Rhinitis
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Lu
Cancer
Pulmona Tuberculosis PTB
Lower Res irato Tract lnfections Pneumonia
lnterstitial Lun Disease ILD
Pneumoconiosis due to various dusts (asbestos, silica, talc, etc.)

258.1
J06
J22
J45
J10
J18
J44
J47
J80
J30
J44

Airway disease due to specific organic dusts (byssinosis, flax-dresser's
disease, etc.
neumonitis due to o anic dusts
H
rsensitivi
Respiratory conditions due to inhalation of chemicals, gases, fumes, and
edema, etc.)
vapors (bronchitis, neumonitis, pulmon
Angina ectoris
rdial infarction
Acute
Chronic ischemic heart disease
Cerebral infarction ischemic stroke
h ertension
ma
Essential
ertensive heart and renal disease
Heart failure
rdia
smal tach
Pa
flutter
and
fibrillation
Atrial
Other cardiac arrh mtas
Atherosclerosis of arteries
Pulmona Heart Diseases

J66

28 lPage

Health Advisory on Air Pollution under NPCCHH

File No. F.No.7OINCDC/CEOH&CCH/2O!!_I9lAP-Advisory

29
{Computer No 3176972)

G€neatdftomeotli.ebyBRuMOHAI{tlallK,O/OSECY-PPS(Bi|i|)_MOHFW'PPs'OrOHFu/OEpaRrMEnITon'r/lol202506:45pm

c34
415
J18
J84
J60-J64

J67
J68

t20
t21

t25
r63

t10
t1

1-ll 3

t50
t47
r48
t49
t70
127

ffi@rs

a5350EA/?O25/169

References
References and links to access information and documents on air pollution and those related to air

pollution health issues from NPCCHH programme, CPCB etc.1

. NPCCHH programme- https://ncdc.mohfiv.gov.in/centre-for-environmental-occupational-health-climatechanse-health-/

2. Detailed forecast analysis/ verification for air po llution in Delhi: https://ews.troDmet.res.in/
https://ews.tropmet.res,in/

1

0 davs forecast.php

3. AQI bulletin at CPCB: httes://cpcb.nic.in/iuoload.rDownloads/AOl

Bulletin_2O251015.pdf

4. 132 Non-attainment/ Million plus cities in India under NCAP
htto s: //cocb. nic. in/uo

on-Attainment Cities.odf

5. Sameer app (Mobile app for AQI [evel):
la

=en IN

ls?i

6. CPCB's "Graded Response Action Plan" for Delhi NCR on air pollution ashttps://cocb.nic.in/uoloadVfinal saded_table.pdf
https ://cpcb.nic. fu/air-pollution/

7. httos://www.who.int/health-tooicVair-pollution#tab+ab

1

National Centre for
Disease Control

'i''-,,'i

Government oflEdie

29 | P a g

e

Health Advisory on Air pollution under NpCCHH
30

Fle No. F,No.7oINCOC/CEOH&CCH/20I8-t9/Ap_Advisory

(Computer No. lrz6972)

Generared from eoffice by BRtl MoHAN MAUI( o/o sEcy -ppslBMM)-MOHFW, pps.
OOHfW OEPaRTMENT on ltltol2ozs o5:., pm

llalional Programme
on Climale Chango
and Human Hsallh

ffi@rs

